The
American commissioner, Mr. Lawson, didn't want
to do anything.
We started to make decisions, to see if we could get
this or that, and we couldn't get anything. That
they don't take those 50,000 acres. They were
going to take 50,000 acres that the dam didn't
need. The commission wanted to buy the acres at $12
or $15 to sell them now at $500 or $1,000 for the
increase in the dam. It didn't want the landowners
of Zapata to take advantage of that value. But
seeing the political movement of General
Eisenhower and
the Republican chairman in Texas, Mr. Porter, he
was very interested in our luck and he began to
manage with President Eisenhower, until
President Eisenhower gave the order to the
Commission of Limits to not take that land, to only
take it to where the water would reach, so that the
water would be left to the owners, and that there
would be some facilities, and thanks to that, it
was built. But, I repeat, the intention of the
Commissioner of the Limits was for Zapata to
disappear.
And
Porter...
Porter was the one who took this matter very
seriously. He took him to the Congress and
he was the first one to get those 50,000 acres of
land and he got us some facilities to change our
lives. And as things are, there's not even a street
here in Zapata called Porter. There should be a
street called Porter, and there should be a street
called Eisenhower. Because they were the ones who
helped a lot. But after the prison, things were
better in Zapata than Guerrero? Now I think so.
Zapata is a town that goes up and grabs a new one. Why
not? What happened with Guerrero? Well, first of
all, they don't have a branch of life nearby. The
life they have are ranches. Most of the rich
ranchers
or rich farmers live in Nuevo Larero. In Nuevo
Larero. They don't live there. They don't live in
Guerrero. Guerrero is exploiting tourism a
little bit, but... And fishing? The fishing that
goes there... But not much, right? And there is no
other type of business there? It's just
commercial. There are a lot of shops here. There
are a lot of shops here. There are times when all the
motels and all the tourist courts and all the
trailer courts and all that are full. And there's a
lot of people here. All of these things are full
here, but in Guerrero there's none. Oh, yes. It's a
problem, perhaps, of failure or lack of tourism
there. Lack of tourism. The people who were
interested in making camps for tourists so that
the tourists could spend a week or two there to make
money, right? No hay esa facilidad. De aquí sí,
aquí hay muchos. ¿Y en qué pueblo está la gente más
contentado?
Pues, francamente, yo creo que los de Guerrero
están satisfechos con su pueblo y nosotros
estamos satisfechos
con el nuestro. In other words, life is different,
but the good things about life are the same. Well,
no, that's not exactly what I want to say. Life is
different. Yes, there is... I don't know how to say
it. In general, the effort of the
population
El trabajo de la Comisión de Límites Mexicana fue
mejor allá que el trabajo que hicieron aquí. Pero
el esfuerzo del pueblo de Zapata fue mejor aquí que
allá. Ah, yes, it's a thing of spirit. Spirit,
that's it. That's the correct word. And Zapata had
more spirit. Yes, yes. Courage. Courage, courage
is correct. And those of Guerrero are more... Yes,
they have... Well, many people of Guerrero live or
have their ranches. They sell their ranches, they
sell... They are content with the life of a
rancher. Here, for example,
there are many cases in which a person was paid
$2,000 for his house over there, and he came here
and made $10,000. And here you
need more work to make a town like the old one. More
words, more work from the people. But maybe this
work is something that makes I attribute it to my
branch,
the last branch
of mine was the water plant. I always
consider that La vida de los pueblos y el porvenir
de los pueblos depende mucho del sistema de aguas.
Un pueblo que tiene un buen sistema de agua, hay una
razón por qué venir a vivir aquí. La planta de agua
yo les estuve ayudando a manejar esta una
temporada.
El record que tiene aquí la planta de agua de Zapata
es que en 20 años no ha tenido una muestra de agua
contaminada. Puede decirse que el agua que se toma
aquí en Zapata es completamente
pura. Es segura, no hay peligro de
contaminaciones. Y eso atrae mucho, ¿verdad? Sí.
Some people who think in a place of good people to
come and live in peace and all that. The
sombrerista Zapata has a very good water plant.
And he comes and he brings another one. And
the other little towns like Lopeño and Palcón and
Ramarito? Ramarito. Ramireño. ¿Cómo se dice?
Ramireño. Ramireño. Ramireño. Ramireño. Bueno.
¿Es de su familia? Sí. Ramireño. Era mi papá. ¿Sí?
Ramireño. Ramireño. En esas gentes, muy
especialmente de Falcón y de Gueloteño, hay
todavía un esfuerzo mayor de las gentes. Here in
Zapata? In Zapata 9?
Yes.
But I've seen a lot of small towns. But they claimed
that if Zapata had the right to take them out, why
not us? And they didn't want to take them out. They
had to go out alone. And they did it again, the
ranchers, Lopeño and Falcón, and they were...
Lopeño and Falcón were thrown into the water of the
dam. They told them to leave, but they didn't pay
them so they could leave. Because they didn't pay
the houses until later. They didn't pay them back.
But frankly, Lopeño, and especially Falcón,
because Falcón and Lopeño are growing more,
Porque Falcón quedó cerca de la cojina, de la
presa. Ah, es un local muy bueno, correcto? Y
Falcón Heights.
Falcón
Heights. Sí. Allí en esos pueblos yo considero que
fue mayor el espíritu de... To preserve. To
preserve their people, because they didn't help
them in anything. They didn't make them pantheons
or anything. No? They told them that here was the
Zapata pantheon that they wanted. And they made
them in this Zapata pantheon. This is for Falcón.
It's for everyone. Yes, but they didn't want to.
They didn't want to. They wanted to stay in
their... In their lands. Their ancestors wanted
them to be in their... Well, I understand, I
understand. And they made their own pantheons
with the cooperation there. I had the
satisfaction of having cooperated with them. I
went and brought them the Falcon Pantheon and the
Lopeño Pantheon. I also... I brought it. The
Ramireño one, I also brought it. I'm also a fan of
Grimesor. But nothing else? A fan, right? I'm not a
fan, but I saw one of those people so... so involved
in the effort to make their town against... Those
towns are so beautiful. Yes. Well... Falcón
helped a lot. A son of Falcón who lives in San Diego,
over there. Yes. He came and razed a town. He
brought some engineers and razed the town. And he
told them, there's the town that was razed.
Whatever they give you for the solar of old Falcón,
San Ignacio is
viejo todavia,
si? San Ignacio intentaron echarlo fuera tambien
pero se defendieron.
Y dio la orden al presidente de que no lo movieran.
Oh. ¿Y qué fue posible esto? Pues, la razón técnica
era que de ninguna manera le llegaba el agua a San
Ignacio. Sí. Yo veía yo una cosa un poco
discriminatoria.
San Ignacio had a lot of agricultural land. Yes.
Agricultural land for irrigation. Yes. And it had
its people there. There's a tourist park in San
Ignacio, over there, very high, in a hill. Do you
remember the high park? San Ignacio is over there,
a place that is very high. Yes, it's high. I passed
through San Ignacio that day. Before you got to San
Ignacio? Yes, it's very... Very beautiful? Very
beautiful, with the... It has there a... Very old
buildings and the, how do you say, sandals. The
thing for the sun. Ah, yes, the sandals. Ah, yes,
those are in the front. Yes. Yes, it's very
beautiful over there. It's quite tall. It's old.
And there on that hill, they drew the line of
expropriation from the outside, taking it to San
Ignacio with all its 8,000 acres of irrigation.
Yes. On the other hand, on the other side of the
hill, the terrain is the same as that of San
Ignacio, except that there the owner was
Millionaire. He was American. They didn't
expropriate it there, just for here. What was his
name? His name was Minkum. Minkum. Oh, I saw him at
his ranch. I saw him and he said, it's a village. No,
it's not a village, but there's a house in Loma.
It's his house. It's a house in Minkum. In where? In
Loma? No, no, it's in the Andoma. The Andoma, yes.
It's a big ranch house. Very big. Very big, very
beautiful. Yes, it's a millionaire. Yes. My
daughter says, she wants this house. And I say,
yes, me too. And then? My eldest son is dead. Now he
has the ranch, the son. Ah, yes. My daughter is also
very poor. Cuando ya se interesó Porter y
consiguió la orden del presidente de que no tomara
la comisión de límites más terreno arriba de la
elevación, la elevación a 3.07, 3.07,
elevación
sobre el nivel del mar, Y San Ignacio está arriba de
307, está como en 325. No había razón por qué tomar a
San Ignacio. Se fue la línea de expropiación, se
fue por la orilla del agua. Sí. Y se fue porque se
salvó. Well, in San Ignacio it is very different
from Zapata. Because it is ancient. Yes, it is very
ancient and there are not many businesses or
anything. What is your idea of the comparison of
life here and in San Ignacio?
Well, the reason I see why San Ignacio is now
declining is because the main life of San Ignacio
is agriculture. Agriculture too. And
agriculture is very declining. All those
villages in the valley that had a lot of
agriculture, they don't go up, they go down. Here,
for San Diego, Benavides, there is a lot of
agriculture. They go
back and forth. It was a time when the cattle came.
The one that has cows now has a lot of money. Vacas
ahora son buenos para el dinero. Y la agricultura
está un poquito... Sí, la agricultura es poco
abajo, pero los ranchos son poco arriba. El farmer
no tiene mucho lugar. No, los con vacas. Pero San
Ignacio... San Ignacio, when we came here, was
richer than Zapata. It had more population,
more trade. It even had something very original.
It didn't have Zapata. There was a kind of social
classification. Yes. There was a club there of
rich people, of aristocrats. From San Ignacio?
From San Ignacio. Oh, aristocrats from San
Ignacio. Who was it? The Uribe people. Those
people, Uribe, Martín. Sánchez, Martín. And they
had clubs and all? But there is something very
meritorious for San Ignacio.
que en aquellos días en que venimos nosotros y
todavía hasta los 20, después de los 20,
la gente de San Ignacio se interesaba más por las
escuelas que la gente de Zapata. Y tenían ellos su
propio distrito escolar. And they were very
straight men, very honest men. And San Ignacio
always had better schools than Zapata.
In Zapata, the schools depended a lot on politics,
or the politics depended on the schools. And they
had teachers to vote for them, whether they were
good teachers or not. And in San Ignacio, no. In San
Ignacio, after 1925 or 1929, when I was in charge of
the treasury of the schools,
San Ignacio had its own district. And it always had
the best teachers. That's why you can see that the
kids of San Ignacio they look more prepared. In
those times? In those times. Not now, because it
changed here. Ah, yes. Well, in which year did
these changes come? From the schools? Yes, from
everything, from life. For example, in which year
were Zapaka higher and San Ignacio lower? The
schools, the school system changed, I think, When
they changed the town, I think. I don't remember,
because in San Ignacio they don't have a primary
school anymore. No, there was only a primary
school. They are, I think, from six or eight, they
come here. Six or eight. I think that, well,
exactly. And then it is necessary for them to come
here? They come here in buses. And if there is a
school there too, College
Station.
College
Universidades? Yo creo que hicieron un solo
distrito escolar aquí en Zapata porque ya el
gobierno
del gobierno escolar aquí en el estado tomó más
interés en la educación y ya no permite que ocupen
maestros a base de A favoritism. A favoritism.
Now, every teacher needs to bring a certificate.
Yes. And things have changed. Kingsville is very
close. Kingsville is very close, yes. Many
children from here went to these universities?
Yes, many went to Kingsville. Many? They have gone
to Laredo, like now, Laredo also has courses. Yes.
Teachers, teachers. Yes, for teachers.
Professors, yes. Yes. And business. Yes. And
nursing. Nursing. I think those three are
materials, they just finish their exams and they
have to go to take them, it will be... Dallas or... I
don't know. And the people from San Ignacio also
went to... Also. Also, many went to the
universities. It's a lot of... But before there
was that demand from the state, that
the judge of the county was the one who put teachers
and removed them and all that, San Ignacio, it can
be said that since 1900, or before 1900, until
1920, San Ignacio had an independent district.
And it was very well managed, and they had a time of
very good teachers. In 1906 or 1907, they had a
professor, Hart, who made records. Then, in our
time, they had Cunningham,
and they had Dr. Wallace, who was also a professor.
They always had better teachers than Zapata, and
better paid. But not now. Not now. They are the
same, in that sense. And the
people.
Usted dice que no quieren salir de Zapata Viejo.
¿Cómo se dice sobre ellos? Que no quieren
progreso. Pues no, como nosotros teníamos que
salir. Sí. ¿Cuándo la pensé? If we wanted to or not,
we had to leave, right? That's how it is that all of
us left. All of us left. And we couldn't live in
other places. We all didn't have a place. Well,
there are some families who take their children,
maybe they go to Marietta or Antonio or other
places. But since they have changed to live in
other places, everything has changed. Although
they
didn't want to. That little question of yours
makes me assume that you already read out there
that there was a group that didn't want the prison
to be built. Yes. Yes or no? No, that was a political
question. No había una sola persona que se
opusiera a la construcción de la presa. Todos
estábamos dispuestos a cederle al Valle la
oportunidad de que hicieran la presa para que les
beneficiara a ellos. Lo único que queríamos
nosotros era que nos pagaran. Sí. Pero como había
mucha política, el grupo contrario al nuestro He
said that we were oppressing him, but it wasn't
true. It was an infamous
lie. I think that all the people, when we thought we
had to leave and leave the town, they didn't leave
us a little disappointed. Because we were going to
leave everything there. Naturally, it hurt to
leave Yes, sentimental
things.
The trees. All the contractors would come and
bring them home. No, no, no. They would take them
out and throw them away. I had planted them when
they were little and I needed them so they could
grow. And when I saw them take them out and throw
them away, I was sad. Yes, it's a very sad thing for
grandparents. Yes, we saw that everything... And
they, none of them, they would put the tree and they
would say, A device. Yes. And they would throw it
away. And they would throw it away. Those things
were what we felt. But that is purely sentimental.
Sentimental. Of the old things. Yes. Houses of
many years. Yes. Yes. Yes. It is a very important
thing. The discomfort that was seen was that the
Commission of Limits According to the
authorities in the
county, you have been committed to bringing the
whole county here to Zapata.
And instead of having gathered the people and
having told them, man, we're going to have to get
out of here, what do you want? Those people from
Falcón said, we want you to do with us what you're
going to do with Zapata. What more does Zapata have
than us? And they didn't see them. They paid them
and they came and made their town and made their
pantheon. And there they have them, they go up.
Falcón goes up. There's oil in Falcón. Oh, oil in
Falcón. Bueno, yo he oído que hay personas de
Guerrero que nunca salió del pueblo viejo. ¿Es la
verdad? Muy pocas, pero... ¿Qué clase de gente
están ellos que no salieron? Porque no les llegó el
agua. Ah, un parte de la ciudad no está. Sí, porque
el pueblo viejo era así. But only the
people who had houses in the upper part of the city
were there? Yes, the English were there. But
they still
lived
there?
But with electricity? In Guerrero Viejo they
don't have anything. Nothing? No roads, no
electricity, nothing? What did you say? Roads.
Roads are bad. There are about 15 or 20 families, if
not more. 15 or 20 families. 20 families, maybe.
100 people, more or less. It's like a ranch. Yes,
it's like a ranch. And from there they make their
living as they can? They are people who live from
fishing or something like that. Mmm, that's good
for fishermen. I think agriculture is one of those
things that you do. Yes. It's a very quiet life, I
think.
Because there's no light. There's no light,
there's no road, no buses, there's nothing, it's
very quiet. There's no telephone either. No, no
telephone, it's too quiet, I think. Yes,
well, it's the same thing in a small town that I
studied in Mexico. Do you know it? The story of the
Mexican Revolution. Yes. I recommend you this
work. It was lent to me. It's called Historia.
Illustrated electronic of the Revolution. Yes.
It has the history of the Revolution. But it has a
lot of photographs. Ah, yes. Look, José. I saw it
there. Look, José. He brings a lot of photographs.
This is one of two. And
the reading is very pleasant because you have fun
with the monkeys, with the portraits.
Apart from the Revolution, he also brings
articles. Yes, they are very interesting. Well,
what do you think about the revolution? Was it a
good thing for Mexico or not?
Well, in part good and in part bad. In part good and
in part bad? Because in some people, that's what I
think, that there were people who became
revolutionaries. Yes. And for your family, was it
a good thing or a bad thing, the revolution? Well, I
would say that...
I think that the so-called
benefits of the practical revolution are not
immediately sold. I have this idea. against the
opinion of the lady. It is
clear that the revolution
had to come one day, right? We all knew that when the
revolution came, it had to come a period of
disorder and destruction and a tremendous thing.
And not only did the revolutionaries destroy the
soldiers of the Federal Army, they believed that
they were the ones who were defending the
government and defending the institutions. And
they destroyed the others in a tremendous
way. I consider this from the time of Juarez.
Juarez
handed him over to a president, Lerdo. General
Díaz made a revolution for Lerdo, and General Díaz
stood up with the principle of no re-election. He
was in the presidency for four years, and at the age
of four he handed over to his substitute.
But then Congress saw that in every change of
president there were political problems,
movements, and then Congress authorized General
Díaz to stay another four years. And he stayed
another four years, and then they told him that he
could stay as many years as he wanted. I believe
that the dictatorship of General Díaz It was
necessary. The country was dead. There was no
economy, no schools, no railways, no roads,
absolutely nothing. And a lot of disorder. Yes.
And an iron hand was needed to put those things. A
lot of debt. Juárez... he was left to owe to the
United States a general. Then General Díaz,
during his 30 years of government, the same
revolutionaries recognize him that in 30 years he
took away from the people the right to vote, the
right to elect president. pero le dio 30 años de
tranquilidad, fuerza económica, el dinero en
México valía, le dio escuelas, le puso
ferrocarriles, le puso caminos. A raíz
de cerca del 910 o del 909,
An American journalist had a conference
with General Díaz, and he told him that he thought
of re-electing. And General Díaz told him that he
no longer thought of re-electing because he was
already old, And he also noticed that the middle
class was interested in politics, that the rich
were interested in politics before.
And the people of the center and the lower class
were not interested. And then he said that he was no
longer reelected. Entonces comenzó el país a
prepararse para las elecciones y comenzó a ver
grupos... Encontrados. Encontrados. Sí. Y luego
Madero se fue, era uno de los candidatos, el
general Reyes era otro de los candidatos, y
comenzaron a pelearse y echarse trancasos allá en
las calles. Entonces alguien le dijo al general
Díaz que mejor se religiera And that's where his
error was, his religion. And then came the Madero
revolution. Yes. In 1910. And he was a very popular
president, but by the time he was in the
presidency, they didn't want him anymore. Yes.
The same people who helped him with the revolution
began to betray him. Yes. Then came the murder
of... You know that, right? Then came the murder of
President Madero, and the murder of the Vice
President, and then came the Carnacist
Revolution. And there was a disorder, a disorder
that didn't stop being harmful. The people
were... Are you from Escalosquena? Yes. Y por ese
lado, la revolución perjudicó mucho. Pero por el
lado ideológico, puramente decir, ahora sí
tenemos el derecho de decir no reelección. El
sufragio efectivo, quién sabe. La no reelección
sí es cierta. Sí,
es cierto en México ahora, no reelección. No.
Pero... Ahora, pasada la revolución, pues, todo
ha venido dependiendo de sus gobernantes. De la
revolución para acá, yo considero que el general
Cairo fue un buen gobernante. Y después, este,
López Mateo.
Este hombre es muy inteligente. A very hard
worker. A great
orator. Oh, Mr. Lopez Mateos? Yes. And who is that?
That's me. Oh! Is Lopez Mateos a friend of yours?
Well, yes. When he came as a candidate to Nuevo
Laredo, I went there to greet him, and there I had
the opportunity. That's where they took me back.
Yes. What year is it? And what year was this photo
taken? 1960, maybe? I don't remember.
When was this photo taken?
Seis de López Mateos y seis de... Diez Odal. Diez
Odal. Y ahora Echeverria. Son tres años, son
doce... Son doce años y tres, quince años, así es
que... Quince años pasado, más o menos. Así es que
son sesenta y tres, cincuenta y ocho. Cincuenta
ocho, sí.
¿Visita usted en México algunas veces? When
I came, I was in Nuevo Larero. In Nuevo Larero, but
more in the interior. Do you know Mexico or the
city? I've been to the city of Mexico last year. We
saw it there on the highway in Guanajuato.
Guanajuato, Celaya. Celaya. For vacation? Yes,
for vacation. Monterrey, San Luis. And life in
Mexico now is different than in the past? Well, in
this last trip that I did,
I found improvements
in some branches. For example, in the road
construction branch, there are many roads that
are very well preserved. And every town has its own
paved road. In the school area, a lot has been
developed. You can see schools in every town. Yes.
In the area of... Tourism as well. Tourism. There
used to be little tourism. There is a service for
tourism. What? There are some trucks on the road.
that if they lack gas, or a tire, or a mechanic, or a
nurse. I got the impression
that in schools,
on roads, in portable water, it has developed a
lot.
And it's very close. The lines, those lines. What?
Those lines, those lines. You can see peace there.
In those three branches, you can see the
development. I didn't find agriculture
very developed. You have to see that we went to a
region where there is no agriculture. In the bay,
agriculture is very good.